---
tags: Essay/Arch
---

Evaluate the strengths and weaknesses of the argument that artefacts and artworks such as the Parthenon Marbles should be returned to their country of origin. Answer using at least  
ONE case study.  

The ongoing debate about the Parthenon Marbles represents a legacy of colonialism that continues to haunt museums to this day. These artefacts were originally part of a temple in Athens called the Parthenon, but were taken in the 19th century for display in the British Museum located in London. 

The Parthenon Marbles are a series of sculptures and carvings that were once part of the Parthenon [^1]. They depict many gods and mortal champions from Ancient Greek mythology. Their removal was consented to by the Ottoman Empire, meaning that it was legal to take them at the time. Be that as it may, modern standards have changed and museums in current times should be held accountable to those standards, not the laws of antiquity. 

The marbles are now divided between the British Museum and Athens, however they have been arbitrarily divided, sometimes shattering the original context of the pieces. Heads have been separated from bodies, chests were removed from shoulders, and panels were estranged from their friezes. This decontextualisation greatly reduces the value of the pieces for educational and artistic purposes. They are fragmented and unable to tell their intended story.

Yet proponents of the British Museum would argue that the marbles have become part of British history too. Exposing the British public to such art inspired many Renaissance artists. Without this exposure, Western art would have evolved in a drastically different direction. It is clear that the expatriation of these works of art has led to the pieces becoming entangled with the cultures of both Greece and Britain.

This raises the question of ownership of the past. The naive answer is the country where the artefact originated, but the issue is not so simple. Artefacts can provide great educational value in other countries, if treated respectfully. They can foster a sense of unity between peoples. In that sense, we all own the past because we all stand to learn from it. However, this sharing must be consensual. While the imperial rulers did consent to the removal of the Parthenon Marbles, it is likely that the inhabitants of Athens would have denied the request due to fears of damages to the temple. Those fears would live to be validated, as the temple has been visibly defaced by these works of art being removed. The great friezes no longer give the sense of marching with the characters and the statues cannot tower over visitors. Had the removal happened in a less destructive manner, perhaps this issue would not be so divisive.

Another reason the British Museum would like to maintain ownership of such beautiful pieces is the revenue generated by the their exhibits. It is true that the exhibit attracts many visitors, this does not on its own justify the removal of the marbles. Where the problem becomes more complex is the usage of this revenue. If the money is used for good, there could be a net positive from the marbles remaining expatriated. The British Museum hosts many artefacts from across the world and serves as a collection of objects from many places. This provides small insights into many places, glimpses that visitors would not be able to obtain without travelling. However, this money remains in the British economy instead of benefiting the countries that produced the items. The continual holding of the marbles and other relics like it represents not only a theft in the past, but ongoing exploitation of other nations' history.

While it can be demonstrated that British ownership of the Parthenon Marbles and other foreign artefacts creates value within Britain, the same cannot be said for the countries those items originate from. The British Museum should immediately return artefacts to their nations of origin where possible.

# Bibliography
[^1]: https://www.britishmuseum.org/about-us/british-museum-story/contested-objects-collection/parthenon-sculptures