---
tags: Essay/Soc
---

<small>
	2560102M
	<br/>
	Eilidh McAlonan
</small>

3. Explain the notion of the ‘naturalization’ of social relations and how it illuminates the connection between sexism and racism.

Sexism and racism are both afflictions of societies new and old. While they appear disparate concepts, they have one common thread: they are both based on identities that have been coerced into reality. Through constant reinforcement of their boundaries, sex, gender, and race have become concepts that continue to be used to justify hierarchies in everyday life. This is the process of naturalisation and the focus of this paper. 

Gender is a system that is constantly in flux. The expectations and roles attached to a gender change drastically over time and space, yet it appears to be a fact of life without inspection through a sociological lens. Judith Butler explains gender as something subjects must persistently "perform" in order to signal gender[^gender]. Subjects are told early in life that they have been assigned a sex, and throughout their lives learn - through observation or discipline - how they are expected to behave. Violation of these rules leads to social recourse and this punishment can push a subject to the margins of society. The resulting marginalisation is how the edges of gender are maintained. Key to their theory is the usage of the word "subject", as it indicates that a person experiences gender but gender is not part of their essence. Moving beyond gender, Butler contests the usefulness of sex as a concept. They argue that sex cannot be expressed without drawing on assumptions learned from other subjects and the subject's own understanding of the world informed by their ideology and culture[^sex]. This means that a subject's understanding of sex is a product of the society they exist within. It, too, is a social construct. Only through naturalisation do they become real. 

Race is also supposedly informed by unbiased observation of biological characteristics. Races are largely constructed as groupings of phenotypic traits which are assumed to be indicative of a person's beliefs, culture, and temperament. This is a greatly reductive way of categorising ethnicities, as there is massive cultural diversity within "races". Continental origin is also used to categorise subjects into races, however an arbitrary cut-off point must be used to do this due to the fact that all humans originated in Africa. This cut-off is often chosen retroactively in order to support conclusions based on phenotype. Furthermore, 87-91% of genetic variation appears *within* continents, while only 9-13% of variation is found between continents[^genes]. The assertion that races are significantly different in terms of genetics simply does not hold. Despite this, people continue to assign traits to perceived ethnic groupings and use them to justify persecution. 

The notion of the technologically and philosophically ascendant coloniser bringing law, science, morality, and efficiency to primitive peoples has powered colonialism for centuries. Scientists scrambled to find evidence to justify these ideas of superiority via methods such as measuring skull sizes[^skulls] or making claims that desert-based societies were backwards because they did not use wheels. During the transatlantic slave trade, black people were portrayed as violent sub-humans that needed to be tamed and were therefore subject to horrendous violence during their forceful transportation across the sea. The notion that black people were inherently lesser to their white counterparts was crucial to the ideology of slavery as it allowed slave-owning societies to be built upon slave labour while maintaining the illusion of morality and justice. Women were subject to the most soul-crushing violence in order to break their spirits. They were targeted for this because women were, and still are, perceived as better at domestic labour. Working in the home meant working near the white slave owners, so the slavers had to ensure that the female slaves would not harm their masters[^hooks]. Due to their naturalised role as carers and the anti-black attitudes of the slavers, black women had to endure violence that went beyond that which was received by black men.

Despite the clear ways that racism and sexism intersect, white feminists have often ignored the experiences of racialised women. This may happen due to explicit racism, or by simply choosing to not listen or assign priority to  other experiences. This has repeatedly led to disagreement and fragmentation of the feminist movement, as marginalised women have been led to feel that mainstream feminism does not front their needs or see them as equals. In addition to this, because white feminists have a tendency to assume that their experiences are universal, such feminists are prone to telling women of other cultures what they should want. No greater example can be found than the debate around the hijab, a type of headscarf worn by some Muslim women. A repeated miscommunication in this discussion is over the definition of equality, which varies from place to place. As April L. Najjaj writes:
<blockquote>
“Equality” doesn’t mean the same thing in Muslim culture as it does in the West; it’s more of a ‘separate but equal’ context, where men have their roles to play in the society, and women have their roles, and these different roles should complement each other, not compete with each other, which is more of a Western perspective on the issue.
</blockquote>
In this passage, she asserts that Muslim societies view the goal of equality not as the aim to afford everyone the same options, but instead as the intention to create harmony between men and women. This understanding of equality focuses on creating comfort within roles and reducing antagonism between genders. It is a collective-focused perspective, differing from Western ideals of individual freedoms. Following the Muslim definition, women being asked to wear a veil that men do not is perfectly consistent with equality. To them, Western feminist ideas of equality are not natural and their goals should be acknowledged as another valid perspective.

Beyond differing conceptualisations of equality, the hijab can represent a choice that a woman can make based on her current circumstances and future aspirations. While feminists should certainly the value freedom to choose, that should not make women's choices immune to analysis. It is worthwhile to consider why women may make the choices they do, even if they do so freely. Such analysis can reveal inequalities that constrain the realm of acceptable choices and unveil hidden pressures that seem to be unremarkable to the individual.

In the Global North, there is a phenomenon where rich white women attempt to buy their way out of oppression. They do this by hiring racialised, typically immigrant, women to fulfil some or all of their domestic duties. Rather than challenge the unbalanced division of labour in their household, which may have been attempted and failed, they exchange money for reduced responsibility. What is most interesting in this situation are the justifications used for picking migrant women in particular. They are said to want to do that work, meanwhile it is said that no native women want to fill those roles. The migrants are seen as freely coming to wealthy countries in order to make use of their domiciliary skills. Yet what is ignored is precisely why the migrants choose wealthy countries: they get paid better than their home countries. They do not choose this work because it is their aspiration, it is simply what is offered to them. In fact, such work can be harmful to the worker as it is poorly paid when local living costs are considered, unstable, and atomic. Rarely is a cleaner, for example, working with the same peers in the same place for long, making unionisation nearly impossible. Adding to this is the fact that most of these workers are managed by agencies, rather than being directly employed. This makes it easier to separate employees if they attempt to unionise. Beyond that, women may be funnelled into these roles because their other skills are not recognised or taken seriously, due to the expectation that people from the Global South are uneducated. Global North countries see themselves as the pinnacle of progress, forging a path to the future while the Global South trails far behind. This belief is a descendent of the previously discussed ideas of the technologically superior coloniser bringing advancement to the primitive colonised; individuals from ex-colonies now move to the imperial core instead of the reverse. Modern adaptions of old attitudes are supported by images of migrant women as ideal for domestic labour, again similar to attitudes towards slaves. It is just part of a new system of colonialism.

With so many women moving away from the Global South to care for the rich and elderly, many families are left with less women. This means that the remaining women must work even harder in order to meet the demands of reproducing the workforce, massively increasing their workload. The only benefit for the families at home is the increased income, however that means little if the family cannot function. Additionally, due to high living costs in the Global North, much of the workers' wages is devoured by continuing to stay there. This leads to the individual taking on extra shifts and overworking themselves in the process. These ideas of racialised women as better in the home cause great harm to their families and the people themselves.

When women do work, they often find themselves in what is known as "clerical work" - jobs that operate in the background to keep the business running smoothly. Meanwhile, men usually occupy client-focused or technical roles as they are seen as rational and are more likely to be promoted as a result of their visibility. In fact, women are promoted at an 18% lower rate when compared to men[^workplace]. This difference may seem small at first, however it compounds as one ascends the hierarchy. If less women are promoted from their starting roles, less women will be available for promotions to middle and upper tiered roles. Racialised women experience further discrimination on all levels - the population of racialised women in high-ranking positions narrows much faster than white women[^workplace]. Women are consistently discriminated against in the workplace because of the perception that they are more suited to managing mundane tasks in the home, rather than meeting the demands of the modern business.

It is not only the private sphere that racialised peoples experience inequality, but also the public sphere. Due to portrayals of black men as violent and hypersexual dating back to the transatlantic slave trade, many judiciary practices in the United States of America have become unequally harsh on black people. They are dramatically over-represented in drug arrests, making up 40% of arrests while only occupying 12% of the population[^drugs]. This disparity is caused by over-policing of majority-black neighbourhoods and searches informed by racial profiling. This is worsened by the profit motive core to private prisons and the ability to force prisoners to work for abysmal compensation. The goods produced by incarcerated people are sold for a profit, meaning that imprisoning more people increases the labour power and therefore profits of the prison. Throughout the War On Drugs, laws have been put into place that target drugs which have been associated with black people such as crack cocaine. Some drug initiatives are even named after the drug[^prison], subtly implying that they target black communities. Programmes such as CRACK attack the bodily autonomy of black women by encouraging them to take long-term contraceptives that render them infertile for up to 5 years. This particular program was mainly advertised to African-American and Hispanic women with substance addictions, offering them $200 if they took contraceptives. The motivation for such a campaign stems from the stereotype of racialised single mothers who abuse substances while pregnant or raising children. Instead of providing assistance to escape drug dependence and care for their children, they are demonised as irresponsible and punished. This is example of how racist views of motherhood can burrow into the legal system and become invisible to observers.

While the imperial core has largely ceased to violently occupy, enslave, and exploit countries in the Global South, vestiges of past rhetoric still inform attitudes towards racialised people across the world. These notions have been hidden by centuries of essentialisation. The Global North benefits greatly from these ideas because it allows exploitation of individuals in the Global South. Meanwhile, women across the world have been reduced to mothers, wives, cooks, and cleaners. This is justified by the belief that women are naturally adapted to such roles, not because they are expected to learn, but rather because they are uniquely suited to it. Illusions of a natural order of men and women have become circular, justifying themselves only in terms of imagined differences between genders. Yet gender isn't a solid concept. It is something that humans have invented and continually change to suit their temporal and spatial contexts. It is within our power to deconstruct these ideas and create a more equal division of labour.

# Bibliography

[^gender]: Butler, J. (1988) ‘Performative Acts and Gender Constitution: An Essay in Phenomenology and Feminist Theory’, Theatre Journal, 40(4), pp. 519–531. Available at: https://doi.org/10.2307/3207893.

[^sex]: Butler, J. (2014) Bodies That Matter: On the Discursive Limits of ‘Sex’. Florence, UNITED KINGDOM: Taylor & Francis Group. Available at: http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/gla/detail.action?docID=1779047 (Accessed: 22 March 2023).

[^skulls]: Morton, S.G. and Combe, G., 1839. _Crania Americana; or, a comparative view of the skulls of various aboriginal nations of North and South America: to which is prefixed an essay on the varieties of the human species_. Philadelphia: J. Dobson; London: Simpkin, Marshall.

[^hooks]: Hooks, B. (2014) Ain’t I a Woman: Black Women and Feminism. London, UNITED KINGDOM: Taylor & Francis Group. Available at: http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/gla/detail.action?docID=1899877 (Accessed: 23 March 2023).

[^Muslims]: Najjaj, A.L. (2017) ‘Feminisms and the Hijāb: Not Mutually Exclusive’, Social Sciences, 6(3), p. 80. Available at: https://doi.org/10.3390/socsci6030080.

[^workplace]: Krivkovich, A., Robinson, K., Starikova, I., Valentin, R. and Yee, L., 2017. Women in the workplace 2017.

[^drugs]: War on Drugs Policing and Police Brutality (no date). Available at: https://www.tandfonline.com/doi/epdf/10.3109/10826084.2015.1007669?needAccess=true&role=button (Accessed: 23 March 2023).

[^prison]: Mazza, B., 2011. Women and the prison industrial complex: The criminalization of gender, race, and class in the war on drugs. _Dialogues Journal_, _5_, pp.79-90.