---
tags: Essay/Arch

---
What do archaeologists mean by 'site'?  
Using TWO case studies, discuss the impacts that different definitions of 'site' might have on their protection.  

There are a variety of ways to define an archaeological site and each definition has significant impacts on the ways they can be researched, as well as the ways that they can be protected for future generations. While academics in the field of archaeology continues to refine their view on the matter, practical implementations prove to be fluid. Regional politics have a significant impact on what is and is not considered significant enough to be protected. This essay aims to explore a selection of definitions, how they impact real projects, and the influence of attempts to construct national identities from historical finds.

A site can simply be defined as *anywhere that has archaeological value*. This definition includes anywhere from historical settlements to dunes with sporadic scatterings of potsherds. It has no sense of time, allowing it to account for relatively young areas of interest. However, it is exactly this broadness that causes problems when applying such a policy. A random campfire used by a traveller on a trip to the local forest would be considered a site under this definition, yet such a location would be unlikely to yield useful insights into the past. Furthermore, a campfire from an hour in the past could be considered a site. Clearly there are more factors to consider.

Drewett (2011, p. 15) attempts to refine the previous definition:
<blockquote>
"Archaeological sites consist essentially of activity areas and rubbish. That is where people  
have done things in the past and left some residue of having done something."
</blockquote>
This interpretation is an improvement in the sense that it is more specific about what it is that archaeologists care about: human activity that occurred in the area. It retains the issues of time insensitivity and inability to provide guidance on how to assign value to a point of interest. In order to fix the latter issue, UNESCO draws upon a notion of "cultural heritage". Cultural heritage includes "monuments, groups of buildings and sites with historical, aesthetic, archaeological, scientific, ethnological or anthropological value."[^heritage]. This significantly constrains the scope of sites to focus mainly on structures erected by humans. It goes on to give examples of how such a structure could be valuable to researchers. However, it is not without its flaws. While this view is well-suited for handling areas modified by humans, it fails to consider the surrounding context of the site. It misses the reasons that developments occur where they do.

In order to widen the lens, processual archaeologists began to consider how a site fits into the greater area. The processual perspective is that sites can only be fully understood when viewed as part of a system of sites Towns are supplied by farms, farms manage multiple fields, rivers connect towns. This definition has evolved over time into the concept of a "landscape". A site is part of the wider landscape. Under this paradigm, scattered sites become connected as clusters of significance. Past peoples may have chosen these areas for access to resources, defensibly, or religious value. These are all aspects of the wider landscape that inform the position of a site. Therefore, a site cannot be understood without taking the surrounding area into account.

Beyond that, an area may be worked upon multiple times across history. This has led to many academics comparing sites to palimpsests, books that have been repurposed for newer inscriptions, obscuring previous developments. The evolving nature of a space makes it difficult to isolate a specific point in time, as remnants may be covered or modified by more recent activities. Some activities may be deemed more or less significant than others, leading to parts of an area being designated as archaeological sites while others are not.

The designation of a site is also a political issue. Historical events can be key for constructing national identity and this can inform which sites are assigned importance. One example of such pressure can be found in the Old City excavations conducted by Nahman Avigad. In this series of excavations, particular focus was given to sites and artefacts that support sensational ideas of Israel's past. In the case of the Burnt House, a spear found next to the remains of a burned body were interpreted as part of the Roman attack on the city. This analysis was founded on dubious information gleaned from ashes. At the time, methods to determine the exact time that a fire occurred from its remains were not accurate enough to support the claim of Roman involvement (El-Haj, 2008, p. 170). The site could otherwise be interpreted as hostility between factions within the city, rather than outside invaders. Instead of waiting for conclusive evidence, the connection was drawn to the Roman attack in order to support a nationalist narrative of Jerusalem's people defending itself from foreign powers. This bias can also be seen in the excavation methods used to uncover Iron Age artefacts. Bulldozers were used to quickly find objects from the period between the Iron Age and Roman Empire, ignoring younger artefacts (El-Haj, 2008, p. 172). This favouritism for items useful for defining modern Israel's national identity has come at the cost of potential discoveries relating to peoples that came after the Romans. Archaeologists must be careful to avoid such biases when designating sites.

One place where pressure from national identity has been a force for good is Stonehenge. This site is a remarkable arrangement of massive stones forming a circle. It was significant to the people of the time for burials and ceremonies. In modern times, the site is key for English tourism. Despite its current and previous value, a narrow definition of a site has led to developments damaging the surroundings of the henge. Since only the henge itself and the approach was legally protected, main roads were constructed close to the site which produced lots of noise pollution and harmed visitors' immersion. When the surrounding landscape was considered as part of the site, it become clear that traffic had to be diverted from the nearby roads. On top of updating the relevant roads, the gift shop was moved behind a hill to avoid intruding on the landscape. This is a significant improvement, however further work is needed to reverse the deforestation of the area. This case study reveals the value of defining sites in terms of their context.

While there are many ways to define an archaeological site, the landscape-based approach emerges as a victor. It allows sites to be preserved more faithfully, as shown with the Stonehenge case study, and balances specificity with flexibility. Although it is a helpful guideline, Archaeologists must be careful to evaluate the political influences on their fieldwork. Such influences can lead to research that neglects cultures outwith their political interests.

# Bibliography
[^heritage]: unesco world heritage programme (no date). Available at: https://pcwww.liv.ac.uk/~Sinclair/ALGY399_Site/unesco-heritage.html (Accessed: 3 May 2023).

El-Haj, N.A. (1998) ‘Translating Truths: Nationalism, the Practice of Archaeology, and the Remaking of Past and Present in contemporary Jerusalem’, American Ethnologist, 25(2), pp. 166–188. Available at: https://doi.org/10.1525/ae.1998.25.2.166.

Drewett, P. 2011, _Field archaeology: an introduction,_ 2nd edn, Routledge, New York;Abingdon, Oxon;.