---
tags: Essay/Arch

---
<small>
	2560102M
	<br/>
	Eilidh McAlonan
</small>

2. “He should not be here, he should be back in the bog”. Evaluate the arguments for and against the display of ‘bog bodies’ to the public using TWO case studies.

Bog bodies provide a unique snapshot into the past - a near-perfect model of what past people looked like. Yet they were once people. They are not like other artefacts - they lived, ate, and slept just like us. This presents a difficult issue that archaeologists and museum curators must confront: how can researchers respect the dead while still advancing the field of archaeology? Furthermore, who gets to make that decision?

Before inspecting the discourse around the issue, it is key to understand what bog bodies are and why they are so interesting. Under normal circumstances, corpses break down into their constituent parts and return to the earth. Yet these bodies have remained intact - so much so that expressions can be observed in some cases. This is due to high PH levels in the water and the protection bogs provide from oxygen. Skin, hair, and organs remain, while bones and clothes disintegrate as normal. Examining their skin for scars can reveal the conditions of their deaths. Their hair, stomach contents, and nails can yield information about their diet as well as their lifestyle.

Beyond the physical aspects of these bodies, the circumstances of their deaths provide a glimpse into the religious and judicial practices of the time. In many cases from the Iron Age, it appears that the person had been executed[^sacrifices]. This shows that bogs had some significance for executions. Additionally, some specimens have been discovered in respectful positions, wrapped in sheepskin capes such as the Elling Woman, Tollund Man, and Huldremose Woman. This indicates that these killings were not all judicial in nature and it is believed that many were in fact sacrifices. Bogs may have been chosen due to the fact that the bodies sink into the water, appearing to be absorbed or eaten. Alternatively, it could be due to the masses of dead flora floating in the bog water. It is possible that bogs were seen as natural graveyards.

A crucial question when discussing the correct treatment of bog bodies is who has the right to make decisions on the individual's behalf. Given that they can no longer protest, archaeologists must endeavour to look into the deceased person's background. The religious and legal practices of the community that surrounded the individual can be inspected, but that information is not always available. It may have been lost to time or simply not recovered yet. Modern descendants can be asked, however their values may not align with their predecessors. Further complicating this, the individual may have disagreed with the practices of the community and that could have led to their resting place in the bog, either due to their direct wishes or from defying the community's rules. Another complicating factor is the *modern* implications of the wishes of the dead; their desires may not be legal or possible anymore. Bog bodies are most frequently discovered while harvesting peat, meaning that their resting place will soon cease to be. As Melanie Giles argues in "Bog Bodies: Representing The Dead", sometimes the only way to learn about what the person would have wanted is to investigate their remains[^Giles]. Archaeologists should continue to study bog bodies and attempt to glean an understanding of the cultures of the past.  

Techniques for analysing and preserving bog bodies are still under development. Only recently was a method for full-body preservation developed for the Grauballe Man - a combination of soaking the body in water, stuffing it with oak bark, and covering with Turkish red oil[^Grauballe]. A previous attempt to preserve the Rendswühren Man involved smoking the body, similar to the preservation of food. The issue with this method is it dries out the cadaver, removing the moisture that was so important for its preservation in the bog. In the case of the Tollund Man - who received the same smoke treatment - the body shrank, leading to a loss of details that could have been invaluable for future analyses. In the end, only his head was able to be preserved[^Tollund]. Such a loss of historical specimens must be avoided in the future. For similar reasons, autopsies are avoided when working with bog bodies. This consensus came too late for the Grauballe Man, who was irreparably damaged by the method. More recent studies have used CT scans to examine the insides of specimens because it is non-destructive.

Beyond the autopsy, the story of the Grauballe Man is a fraught with mistreatment. Immediately after discovery in Denmark, the body was quickly transported to a Danish museum and displayed temporarily[^Grauballe]. This decision to showcase the discovery before preserving it was controversial among the scientific community. Their concerns proved correct, as mould began to grow on the body. Fortunately, the display period ended before it sustained major damage. After preservation, the body was put in an exhibit that was built to look like his resting place. The exhibit is reverent, however the accompanying documentary dramatises the story. Creating such a spectacle around what is essentially a grave is insulting and should be revised by the curators.

One positive lesson that can be taken from the treatment of the Grauballe Man is to keep remains within their country of origin. The unfortunate truth is that most recovered remains are transported to faraway halls, instead of remaining within their homelands. This is particularly true in countries that bore the brunt of colonialism, where early anthropologists and archaeologists stole specimens such as mummies to display in their own country[^colonialism]. Bog bodies should be returned to their countries and treated according to local customs. This may mean displaying them in a local museum, or storing them in a dignified manner.

The debate around bog bodies does not only exist in academic spheres. The public must be involved in this discussion and a German museum aimed to do just that. This particular museum contains six bog specimens and maintains a poll box to gather comments. Visitors are encouraged to post their opinions on the exhibit to be collated yearly. While the 2001 results[^countries] are commonly used to argue in favour of such exhibitions, there are a number of issues with the sample. The largest issue is the sample size of only 246. This shrinks down to a minuscule 72 when you only consider adult responses. This sample size is insufficient to make conclusions about the broader population. Beyond that, the types of people who are likely to comment must be brought into question: those who disagree with the exhibit may simply not visit and poorer individuals are less likely to visit museums[^visitors]. What this study is able to tell us is the media response is not necessarily the same as public opinion. The rates of dissent are significantly lower than what one would expect given the media coverage. While this study is insufficient, the topic certainly warrants a more thorough investigation using a larger and more diverse sample. Such a study would provide an excellent view of German views on the display of bog bodies. 

Remains discovered in peat bogs provide a fascinating lens into the past. However, the moral issues of handling a dead body must always be kept in mind and should certainly influence decisions made by curators. Bog bodies will continue to be upturned by the peat industry and archaeologists should respond by studying them in a dignified manner. As for exhibitions, they should apply local and historical customs when deciding how to honour these incredible specimens. Some regions will decide that they belong to the bog, others will provide access only to researchers, and some will display them honourably. That is the best we can do for our ancestors.

[^sacrifices]: Lynnerup, N. (2015) ‘Bog Bodies’, The Anatomical Record, 298(6), pp. 1007–1012. Available at: https://doi.org/10.1002/ar.23138.

[^Giles]: Giles, M., 2006, November. Bog Bodies: Representing the Dead. In _paper delivered at the Conference Respect for Ancient British Human Remains: Philosophy and Practice. Manchester Museum_ (Vol. 17).

[^Tollund]: The Tollund Man - Preservation (2016). Available at: https://web.archive.org/web/20160304124758/http://www.tollundman.dk/konservering.asp (Accessed: 8 March 2023).

[^Grauballe]: Asingh, P. and Lynnerup, N. (2016) ‘Bog bodies: the Grauballe Man’, Technè. La science au service de l’histoire de l’art et de la préservation des biens culturels, (44), pp. 84–89. Available at: https://doi.org/10.4000/techne.1134.

[^colonialism]: On Display: Ethics of Human Remains in Museums & Online (2022) TalkDeath. Available at: https://www.talkdeath.com/on-display-ethics-of-human-remains-in-museums-online/ (Accessed: 8 March 2023).

[^countries]:: Gill-Robinson, H. (2004) ‘Bog Bodies on Display’, Journal of Wetland Archaeology, 4(1), pp. 111–116. Available at: https://doi.org/10.1179/jwa.2004.4.1.111.

[^visitors]: Kirchberg, V. (1996) ‘Museum visitors and non-visitors in Germany: A representative survey’, Poetics, 24(2), pp. 239–258. Available at: https://doi.org/10.1016/S0304-422X(96)00007-1.
